
#### Back to [Home](https://brclar15.github.io/tabulaCapitolina/)
#### Back to [Analysis Overview](analysisPage.md)

# Analysis of Retellings of the Tabula Capitolina compared to the *Iliad*

This section contains the analysis of the retellings for each book on the stone and compares them to the *Iliad*. The textual retelling covers books 7 through 24, and the visual retelling covers books 1, and 13 through 24, due to the damage that the stone has sustained. 


## [Book 1](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.08507,0.009549,0.5655,0.1230)

The pictorial retelling of this book is both expansive and precise. The band of images for book 1 occupies the prominent position of the top edge of the stone. As a result, it is about twice as long as the bands for books 13 through 24 (as well as the length that books 2 through 12 would have been in the stone's original condition). The band appears to contain five episodes, more than any other band on the Tabula Capitolina. Not only are there more episodes, but they are more thoroughly labeled than the other bands. Instead of merely providing names, as is the common practice for the bands for books 13 through 24, book 1 contains more complete ideas. The first episode is labeled [ιερον απόλλωνος ζμινθέως χρυσης](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.08247,0.08478,0.1582,0.03125) and the fourth is labeled [οδυσσευς την εκατoμβην τω θεω αγων απολλωνι χρυσηις](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.5195,0.09954,0.09332,0.03356). This type of description is unique to the labels found in book 1, as the rest of the labels are typically restricted to personal names. The amount of space and detail given to this books show its clear importance. 

Regrettably, it is impossible to know exactly what preceded this first scene of Chryses before the temple of Apollo. Most scholars think that it was an elaborate scene of depicting Chryses pleading with Agamemnon for the return of his daughter[^1]. However, this would detract from the symmetry of the stone, with book 1 spanning three quarters of the top band. One is tempted to suggest that scenes from the *Cypria* might have filled out the upper band of the left hand side of the Tabula[^2]. However, the *Cypria* is conspicuously missing from the table of contents on the stone, making it unlikely that a detailed scene completed the damaged portion of the stone. Still, given the fluid boundaries of these epics as they come down to modern readers from antiquity, it is possible that a scene on the border of the *Cypria* and the *Iliad*, such as the seizure of Briseis or Chriseis[^3], was included here. Still, the lack of symmetry that the upper band being devoted almost exclusively book 1 causes does not rule out that it was the original state of the stone. Given that the inscribed stele is not perfectly symmetrical, with books 1 through 6 or 7 on the lost stele and books 7 through 24 on the surviving one, one does not need to impose strict symmetry on the Tabula. 

Due to its length and detail, the visual retelling of book 1 matches the *Iliad* very closely. In both, [Chryses invokes Apollo's wrath](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.08811,0.01418,0.1608,0.1059) against the Greeks, [the god sends a plague](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.2441,0.01678,0.06337,0.1050) upon them, [the Greeks hold an assembly](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.2977,0.01563,0.1764,0.1117) to discuss the matter, [Odysseus brings Chryseis and sacrifices](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.4538,0.02749,0.1873,0.1027) back to Apollo, and [Thetis supplicates Zeus](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.6107,0.02199,0.08876,0.1062) on her son's behalf. The Tabula goes so far as to name every single Greek who speaks during the assembly in its labels. Weitzmann incorrectly makes Kalchas part of an episode that is distinct from the assembly[^4]. It is more likely that he is merely gesturing to the preceding events, rather than engaged with a figure in front of him. 

The figure of [Athena restrains Achilles](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.3863,0.01678,0.08919,0.1071) by the hair in both the visual retelling and the *Iliad*. The inclusion of this element of the episode shows its essential nature and importance, as well as the artist's precision. It is difficult to speculate about whether this element would have been present in the textual retelling. On the one hand, one could expect it to be subsumed by the assembly, and skipped over since it blocked an action from happening (Achilles striking Agamemnon), rather than causing a result. Additionally, the textual retelling largely avoids the actions of the gods. Still, given how expansive the textual retelling would have been, with books 1 through 6 or 7 taking up the same amount of space that the retelling of books 7 through 24 did, it is possible that the Athena element was in fact included. Regardless, one cannot know for sure, due to the damage the stone suffered and the lack of *comparanda* from other stones. 

The episode where [Thetis supplicates Zeus](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.6107,0.02199,0.08876,0.1062) is a prime example of how highly compressed these episodes can be. The reader does not get the initial part of the episode, namely Achilles' plea to Thetis, but rather the outcome. Besides these two figures and their posture, no more information is needed in order for the audience to be able to recognize this episode. An ancient audience would have been able to read this scene, even without Thetis being labeled. Zeus is not labeled, but this is not a requirement for the scene to be recognizable, given his posture and connection to Thetis. The iconography of the scene serves to identify the episode, and the audience's knowledge of the poem fills out the remaining elements. The Tabula is a highly compressed retelling, and therefore cannot spell out the entire episode, but rather chooses evocative moments that call to mind the wider episode. 


	[1] : this is supported by comparison with 3C and 6B

	[2] : Squire 2011, 171 only briefly entertains this idea, but does not explain 
	his quick decision to move on While Petrain does not explicitly propose this hypothesis,
	he does suggest that there are episodes missing from the band dedicated to the
	*Aethiopis* (Petrain 198) By extension, that would mean that there was more to be found
	in the band for book 1 as well. Given the fact that the preface is missing its first three words,
	and that there would have needed to be space for the first inscribed stele, 
	there is no doubt that at least one addition scene was found in book 1. The question 
	that is unanswerable is, how many scenes, and were they all within the narrative bounds of the *Iliad*  

	[3] : see Proclus' summaries of the Epic Cycle, found in the Venetus A and Upsilon 1.1 
	manuscripts of the *Iliad*

	[4] : Squire 135


## Book 7

###  οι δ αχαιοι τιχος τεχαι ταφρον ποιουνται περιτας ναυς

The textual retelling on the Tabula merely mentions that the Greeks built a wall and a trench around the ships. In its extant condition, it completely skips over the duel between Hector and Ajax, as well as the Trojans' unsuccessful peace attempt. An explanation for this is that neither episode changes the outcome or precipitates any action in the *Iliad*. Hector and Ajax part ways in a tie, and the Greeks rebuff the Trojans attempt to sue for peace by returning the stolen property alone, but not Helen. The Tabula seems to concern itself with events that further the action of the poem, and not side action or conversations that do not impact the course of the narrative. 

Another explanation for their exclusion, similar to book 1, is that they were not, in fact, excluded. The textual retelling does not mark Iliadic book divisions in any way. Therefore, one does not know where one book starts and the next ends expect for the narrative context. It is possible that the duel between Hector and Ajax, which occupies the majority of book 7, was found at the end of the first stele, which is now lost. Building a wall and a trench may not seem like the most crucial action of book 7, but this addition is necessary to set up the later battle for the Greek ships.


## Book 8

### αμφοτερων δ αυτων εξοπλις θεντων και μαχην εν τω πεδιω συναψαντων οι τρωες εις το τιχος τους αχαιους κατα διωκουσιν και την νυκτ εκεινην επι ταισ ναυσιν ποιουνται την επαυλιν

In book 8, the battle between the Greeks and Trojans rages fiercely. The textual retelling reflects the *Iliad* when it stresses that the Trojans camped in front of the ships. This fact precipitates the next several books of the poem because it breaks the series of lighter skirmishes that had characterized the first nine years of the Trojan War. The fact that this added element of the otherwise generic fighting underscores a pattern that will be seen throughout the rest of the analysis - that the Tabula stresses actions that lead to other key moments in the narrative. 

The stone does not, however, include the actions of the gods. In *Iliad* 8, Zeus rebukes Hera and Athena, and then proceeds to strengthen the Trojans. Excluding Thetis' supplication of Zeus in book 1, the tabula does not show the actions of the gods in heaven. They are occasionally seen on the battlefield (see books 14, 18-22, and 24), but never in assembly or dialogue amongst themselves. All of the action in the textual retelling takes place at Troy, without exception. This holds true for the visual retelling as well, except for Thetis and Zeus, which precipitates the rest of the *Iliad*. The scene jumps found in the *Iliad* serve to augment its narrative, but do not prove essential enough for this retelling. The hand of the gods in the Trojan war is undeniable, but they do not appear repeatedly as Zeus grants and removes their permission to intervene. Instead, their presence is largely limited to the direct actions that they take on the battlefield. 

## Book 9

### τοις δε των αχαιων αριστευσιν δωκει βουλευσαμενοις [τιν] αποτειλαι προς αχιλλεα αγαμεμνων δε δρεας τε πολλας διδωσι και την βρισηιδα οι δε πεμφθεντες προς αυτον οδυσσευς τε και φοινιξ προς δε τουτοισ αιας απαγγελλουσιν αχιλλει τους λογους τους λογους παρ αγαμεμνονος ο δ ουτε προσδεχεται τας δωρεας ουτε συνχωρει διαλυσαμενος αυτοις βοηθειν

Comparing the textual retelling for book 9 to the *Iliad* shows the importance of dividing episodes properly. One may be tempted to take the embassy to Achilles as one episode that encompasses the entirely of book 9. However, both the textual retelling and the poem itself suggest that it should be broken up into two episodes. First, as the text of the stele tells us, the Greeks discussed and arranged to send the embassy to Achilles. While the speech of Agamemnon is not preserved in the retelling, the idea behind it and the ensuing discussion causes the planning phase to be separated from the embassy itself. The details given by the stele, that Agamemnon plans to send back Briseis and several gifts, show how this episode is distinct and elaborate. The actual embassy itself comes after, and is mentioned to be unsuccessful. Odysseus, Phoenix, and Ajax are essential figures in this episode, as they are all named, even in a highly compressed retelling such as the stele. 

## Book 10

### οι δ αριτσεις ταυτ ακουσαντες κατασκοπους πεμπουσιν οδυσσεα και διομηδην ουτοι δε δολωιν συναντησαντες υφ εκτορος απεσταλμενω κατα σκοπω πυθομενοι παρ αυτου την ταξιν των το στρτοπεδον φυλσσοντων αυτον τε διαφθειρουσιν και ρησον τον θρακων μετ αυτου δε και αλλους και λαβοντες τας ιππους επι τας ναυς ελαυνουσιν

In contrast to book 9, the night raid is one episode, where the planning portion is merely an extra element. It is not given significant enough treatment in the *Iliad* nor in the textual retelling to merit its own episode. Much like the embassy to Achilles, the night raid has certain essential elements. The death of Dolon and Rhesus cannot be left out of this episode. This is seen through their expanded nature in the textual retelling. While Rhesus is only mentioned as "the Thracian" on the stele, and his true significance is famously not given in the *Iliad*, his importance to the course of the war would have been familiar to a traditional audience. There was a prophecy, as seen in other sources, that Troy would not be able to fall if Rhesus' horses drank from the Scamander. While unnamed, this is the cause for Odysseus and Diomedes' seemingly unheroic slaughter of the Thracian king in his sleep. Given the abbreviated nature of retellings, a length backstory like this would not figure on the Tabula. 

## Book 11

### ημερας δε γενομενης μαχην συναπτουσι εξ ης των αριστεων τρωθεντες αγαμεμνων διομηδης οδυσσευς μαχαων ευρυπυλος επι τας ναυς αναχωρουσιν πατροκλος δε πεμφθεις παρ αχιλλεως πυνθανεται νεστορος τα περι την μαχην

Like the majority of the so called "battle books," the stele's retelling of book 11 closely matches the episodes found in the *Iliad*. Even in its highly compressed format, the stone still names all five of the Greek commanders who are wounded and forced to retreat from the fray. One can assume that, since all of them are named (and in the same order as in the *Iliad*), that each of their injuries is an essential part of this episode. Any retelling needs to remove these five warriors from the battlefield in order to heighten the tension just before the Trojans breach the Greek fortifications. 

Next, there is a brief episode that takes place in Achilles' camp. Although he still retains his divine wrath, Achilles is greatly troubled about the course of the battle. He sends Patroclus to Nestor in order to figure out what is going on. Here, one sees the common trend of the Tabula to set up action that is to come later in the epic. This may seem like an insignificant episode, but it is necessary in order to stir up the emotions that cause Patroclus to beg to be allowed to go onto the battlefield in book 16. The textual retelling needs to connect its action in a logical way, and therefore preserves smaller, but still independent, episodes such as this one. 

## Book 12

### εκτωρ δε ρηξας τας καθ αυτον πυλας εις το τιχος εισπιπτι των ελλνων

Book 12 is made up of one complete episode in which Hector breaks through the Greek fortifications. The textual retelling has already moved the action just in front of the Greek walls, and therefore does not need to describe the way in which the battle escalates. It is concerned with the final outcome and its impact on the narrative, not the events that lead to the outcome. One should not expect to find a description of how the Trojans planned to breech the walls in a retelling. That element would be far too specific and does not change the outcome of Hector breaking through the walls.  

## [Book 13](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.07639,0.7904,0.8762,0.1977)

### και μαχην συναπτει προς των νηων της δ ομαλης γινομενης

For the next three books, the stele's retelling is brief, merely saying και μαχην συναπτει προς των νηων της δ ομαλης γινομενης. It does not detail the way that the battle intensifies or the heroes that fall, but rather moves on to the outcome of this intense fighting, Patroclus entering the fighting. While book divisions are not present throughout the stele, their absence is particularly noticeable here where one sentence stands for three books. 

The pictorial retelling, which resumes here, cannot skip over the action on the battlefield, as it must show some action for each book. When compared to the prose summary on the stele, the carved bands are, in a sense, freer to include finer detail and action that may not be strictly essential to the poem. One could imagine that an ancient audience would recognize the *Iliad* without the deaths of [Akamas](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.09172,0.8142,0.2781,0.1471), [Othryoneus](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.3296,0.8149,0.2645,0.1543), or [Asteropaeus](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.5891,0.8016,0.3533,0.1701). Similarly, these names have not come down to a modern audience as being essential to the poem. However, when given the freedom to expand, the visual retelling chooses to name certain figures specifically. This helps identify the figures, as many of them are indistinguishable without these labels. 

It is difficult to assert the importance of these figures in the battle books, such as Othryoneus in book 13. He came to Troy in order to marry Cassandra, who appears on the stone during the *Ilioupersis* scenes. This connection to the wider myth of the Trojan war could make Othryoneus' death notable enough to be preserved in the pictorial retelling. However, this same logic does not explain why certain deaths are not depicted, such as Alcathous. He was not only the brother-in-law of Aeneas, a figure central to the Tabula Capitolina, but is even called ὤριστος ἐνὶ Τροίῃ εὐρείῃ [^5] in the *Iliad*. One might expect to see his death depicted for these reasons, but it does not appear on the stone. The visual bands for the battle books cannot possibly show all of the deaths, but it is unclear in this instance why certain ones take precedence over others. 

[Asius' name](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.6131,0.8177,0.09896,0.02387) is inscribed above his figure, instead of below in the usual position of the captions. The only other instance of this is the [ασπις](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.3030,0.5152,0.07841,0.02344) in book 18. Jahn in his drawing misses Ainus' name, but includes the ασπις, while the IG includes Ainus's name (without mentioning its position) and overlooks the ασπις. 


	[5] : Iliad 13.433

## [Book 14](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.07523,0.6580,0.8701,0.1691)

### και μαχην συναπτει προς των νηων της δ ομαλης γινομενης

Book 14 is not represented in the textual retelling beyond the mention of fighting that covers books 13 through 15. The reason for this brevity is the same as for book 13 and 15. The textual retelling largely does not detail the individual actions on the battlefield, but instead notes the intensity of the battle and who has the upper hand. 

When compared to the *Iliad*, the carvings seem to be inconsistent. According to the labels, the first episode shows [Archelochus fighting with Locrian Ajax](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.08912,0.6621,0.3226,0.1617). However, in the *Iliad*, Locrian Ajax slays Satnius, and then Telamonian Ajax slays Archelochus inadvertently, when he was aiming at Polydamas. These two actions take place only twenty-four lines apart, and the Greek characters do, after all, share the same name. It would be easy to say that the artist of the Tabula simply made a mistaken, and labeled Ajax improperly. However, in keeping with Squire and Petrain's argument, the Tabula must be seen as a highly complex and learned object. Mistakes are certainly probable, but highly unlikely on an object that was produced with such care. Instead, it is likely that these two figures are meant to evoke the wider fighting that happens in this book. It is not necessary to show the individual actions aligned precisely to each figure, but rather these two warriors stand for the battle as a whole. The two are closely connected, though not directly linked in the *Iliad*, so by placing them in reference to the other, the combination calls to mind this section of the poem. 

The next two pairs of images are labeled as [Ajax and Poseidon](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.3941,0.6628,0.2914,0.1671), and [Hector and Apollo](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.6296,0.6619,0.3116,0.1554). The orientation of Ajax and Poseidon is perplexing, as the figures are facing each other, with Ajax appearing to be ready to strike the god[^6]. Poseidon fought on the side of the Greeks, and leads them into battle during book 14. Again, one could theorize that the figure is mislabeled, and that the figure labeled as Poseidon is meant to be one of Ajax's other victims. Yet, the figure does not wear armor, which supports its identifications as a god, since gods have no need for armor. Similarly, the figure labeled Apollo, who faces Hector in the next pair, does not wear any armor. These two pairs, taken side by side, make their orientation less problematic. While a modern audience might expect the gods to go in front of their respective forces, the Tabula places them face to face in order to show the interaction. Their orientation does not denote a hostile nature, in spite of Ajax's distinct spear, but rather shows a connection, and then lets the audience fill in the context based on their knowledge of the poem. Poseidon does not directly interact with Ajax in book 14, but instead, Ajax stands for the Greek forces as a whole, just as Hector stands for the Trojan forces. 

However, Apollo does not figure in this book of the *Iliad* at all. Perhaps he is there to show the contrast and to balance out Poseidon's aid. Apollo does join the fray at the very beginning of book 15. The artist may not have been concerned with sticking rigidly to the narrative boundaries of each book. By moving Apollo's intervention to the end of book 14, the artist leaves himself more room to expand the episode for book 15, while not interrupting the narrative sequence of the poem. This might seem counterintuitive, since he chooses to lay out the Iliadic visual retelling according to books, but the sequence of events is not altered. He is intentionally playing with the boundaries of the epic by shifting where one book starts and the other ends. The audience of the Tabula is already intimately familiar with the *Iliad*, and therefore can read these pictorial bands skillfully and likely even quickly, making the transition points less rigid than they would be to a modern reader. Of course, certain major events must happen in the proper book. The artist does not have complete freedom to rearrange the order of events, nor to change in which book a major action occurs. However, as seen here, he is free to alter the narrative bounds of each book, so long as he does not change the overall sequence or plot. 

A notable omission in both of the Tabula's retellings is the episode of Hera and Zeus. This unique episode is what allows Poseidon, and later Apollo, to join the battle. Because of this causal link, as well as the Tabula's aversion to depicting events that do not take place at Troy, it is not surprising that the artist removes this episode. However, the singularity of this episode and its extended treatment in the poem itself does call the reason for its absence into question. 

	[6] : Pertain writes that "[Ajax] advances on Poseidon," which seems 
	to suggest that he views this scene as hostile

## [Book 15](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.1024,0.4813,0.8383,0.1964)

### και μαχην συναπτει προς των νηων της δ ομαλης γινομενης

Still, the textual retelling for this book has been continued from books 13 and 14. It does not detail the attack on the Greek ships, but rather moves past the escalation of the battle until book 16 where Achilles learns of the situation. The visual retelling shows a [group of Trojans standing before Hector](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.08883,0.4885,0.5483,0.1860), who is throwing a torch at the ship that [two figures](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.5932,0.4837,0.2170,0.1354) are defending. The labels do not identify these warriors as Ajax and Teucer, but it is clear through comparison with the *Iliad* that that is who the hulking warrior and the smaller archer hiding behind his shield are meant to be[^7]. It is unusual that the caption reads "επι ναυσι μαχη," instead of their names, when the ship is so clearly present in the carving. But still, the fact that those two characters are not labels suggests that they would have been easily recognizable to an ancient audience. Their reputation for fighting together in this very formation is instantly recognizable to audience familiar with the *Iliad*. 

The depiction of the group of Trojans also sheds light on how these images retell the action of the book. The [labels](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.1007,0.6391,0.5683,0.03841) name some of the most memorable figures among the Trojans fighters: Hector, Aeneas, Paris, and Helenus. However, Paris and Aeneas only kill one man each within book 15 of the *Iliad*, and Helenus is not even named. It appears that the Tabula uses these names to stand in for the whole of the Trojan forces. They are not named in order to retell their individual actions, but rather to evoke the larger Trojan army. Cleitus dies unceremoniously, but one could make an argument for the inclusion of Caletor, particularly in his fallen position on the stone. Caletor was the first Trojan who tried to hurl a torch at the ships. In his attempt, Ajax strikes him down before he can light the ships on fire, thereby making Hector the first Trojan to achieve that goal. By including Caletor, especially laying injured on the ground, the Tabula shows the ultimate outcome of the action, namely that Hector is the first to set the ships ablaze. 

In the *Iliad*, this book opens with Zeus' anger at Hera for her actions in book 14. As a result of this rage, he further allows the tide of battle to turn in the Trojans' favor. Yet, none of this is retained in either the textual or visual retelling. The reason for this is that the gods' plan only set this book in motion, and, as has been shown, the Tabula concerns itself more with outcomes, rather than plans that precipitate later actions. 

	[7] : Squire 194 also views these figures as Ajax and Teucer without much difficulty. 
	He goes on to note the "additional [indistinct shape](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.7873,0.5017,0.09751,0.07031) at the right end of the ship," 
	but offers no explanation. This mass is absent from Jahn's drawing. Since the area in question
	does not resemble a person, I propose that it should be taken as another prow of a Greek ship. 
	This small addition would heighten the tension and remind the reader of the potential 
	mass destruction due to the Trojan onslaught. However, the stone is too damaged 
	to identify this was confidently.

## [Book 16](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.08015,0.3418,0.8631,0.1747)

### αχιλλευς παρα του πατροκου τα περι την μαχην ακουσας και δεομενου βοηθειν αυτον η ε πεμψαι τοις ελλησιν ιδων την του πρωτεσιλαου ναυν καιομενην πεμπει μετα των μυρμιδονων τον πατροκλον τους ιππους αυτωι δους και τοις οπλοις τοις αυτου καθοπλιξας ο ιδοντες οι τρωες ιθυς απαντες φευγουσιν εν δε τηι τροπηι ταυτηι πατροκλος αλλους τε πολλους αποντεινι και σαρπηδονα τον διος τους δε λοιπους εις το τιχος καταδιωκει εκτωρ δ αυτον παταξας αποκτεινει και των οπλων εγκρατης γεινεται

The retellings of this book are largely consistent, but the visual retelling offers a unique approach at the end of this book. Both retellings show the arming of Patroclus. The prose summary says that, upon hearing the report of the course of the war and seeing Protesilaus' ship burning, Achilles sends Patroclus to aid the Greeks. It also mentions specifically that he gives his companion his armor and his horses. The band with the images for this book only shows Patroclus donning the armor, since the armor plays a more prominent role in the narrative than the horses do. 

The labels for the visual retelling list [Phoenix and Diomedes](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.2572,0.3605,0.1473,0.1504) as being present during the [arming episode](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.1007,0.3453,0.4424,0.1658). This conflicts with both the textual retelling and the *Iliad*. Diomedes' presence in this episode does not match any of the extant sources, nor is there an especially close connection between these characters. He may have any number of roles in this episode, such as giving advice to Patroclus, assuring Achilles that he would return safely, or pleading for Achilles to come himself. There is no way of knowing just from looking at the Tabula, since it is not corroborated by any other source. The scene on the Tabula is meant to remind an audience already deeply familiar with the traditional myths of the *Iliad*, not to spell out the finer connections and context. One possible explanation is Diomedes' proximity to this episode in textual retelling[^8]. Ten lines earlier than where the retelling for book 16 begins, Diomedes has been wounded on the battlefield. With this in mind, it is possible that the artist decided to add him to this episode. Yet, that does not explain the choice of Diomedes over the other wounded chiefs. Here, a modern audience is on very unsure footing, since it lacks the mythological variants that might help explain the inclusion of Diomedes. 

As mentioned above, Achilles sends Patroclus to fight after seeing the ship of Protesilaus burning. Protesilaus was the first Greek to die upon landing at Troy, and his story would have been related in the *Cypria*. He is only mentioned in passing in the *Iliad*. The hero is referenced once in the catalogue of ships [^9], and then twice in reference to his burning ship. His is the first of the Greek ships that Hector sets ablaze [^10]. These references are so brief, and yet, he is explicitly named in the textual retelling at this point in its summary. The fact that, even in this highly compressed retelling, it is the burning of Protesilaus' ship that factors into Achilles' decision to send Patroclus to war highlights the centrality of this element to the wider episode. It is possible that Achilles had an intimate relationship with Protesilaus, and so that reminder of his death evokes strong emotions within him, just as occurs with the death of Patroclus and Antilochus. Another idea, which is not mutually exclusive of the former, is that Achilles simply knows what the burning of the ships means for the Greek forces. It spells ultimate destruction and removes the promise that his comrades would be able to return home safely. Yet, if that alone was the case, the choice to name Protesilaus explicitly seems unnecessary. 

The visual and textual retelling both show [Patroclus slaying Trojans](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.4786,0.3507,0.4528,0.1502) on the battlefield. He kills at least one Trojan in the carved band, and routs a Trojan chariot, which is likely meant to stand for the larger Trojan forces. The prose summary explicitly mentions that he slays Sarpedon, the son of Zeus. Sarpedon's death is an important element in the fighting and death of Patroclus, but is shown not to be essential since it is omitted from the carved images. On the one hand, this is unexpected, given Sarpedon's fame and the amount of images of him being carried from the battlefield found on Greek vase painting[^11]. However, a traditional audience would have considered his death tightly bound to the element of Patroclus fighting and dying at Troy. The mere presence of Patroclus fighting in Achilles armor is enough to call to mind the death of Sarpedon. He could have been explicitly named, as he is in the inscribed stele, or he could be absent but implied, as he is in the carved band for this book. 

The death of Patroclus is one of the core deaths that must occur within the narrative bounds of the *Iliad*. Much like Hector, he cannot live beyond the scope of the poem. The textual retelling mentions Hector slaying Patroclus and taking his armor. However, this scene does not appear within Patroclus' episode in the carved images. The image band for book 16 ends with Patroclus routing the Trojan chariot. One might expect an image such as the one found in the center of the band for book 22, where Achilles is seen killing Hector. However, since Patroclus' body figures in every scene of the episode of book 17, the artist was able to omit showing the moment that Patroclus dies, or even the confrontation with Hector. The reader of the Tabula was interested in contemplating the *Iliad* as a complete, continuous poem. Even though the visual retelling is divided into separate books, it is meant to be read as a whole work. With Patroclus' body so central to the following band, it may have seemed redundant to have his body appear at the end of the band for book 16, as it does in the *Iliad*. As will be seen in the next book, the artist may have felt that the audience did not need the moment of Patroclus' death, since his corpse dominates book 17's pictorial retelling. 


	[8] : for a discussion on the connection between the textual retelling and 
	other sources, notably Apollodorus' *Bibliotheke*, see Rossum-Steenbeck

	[9] : *Iliad* 2.695-2.710

	[10] : *Iliad* 15.705, and it is from his ship that Patroclus 
	strikes down his first foe (*Iliad* 16.286)

	[11] : Lowenstam 175

## [Book 17](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.09346,0.1973,0.8383,0.1810)

### μαχης δε περι του νεκρου γενομενης

The retellings of 17 match the *Iliad* closely. The carved images show three different scenes where the [Greeks defend Patroclus' body](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.09954,0.1895,0.3730,0.1749), [drag it off](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.4008,0.2090,0.1759,0.1606), and then [load it onto a chariot](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_10@0.5420,0.2131,0.3825,0.1556). This expanded version of this episode reflects its lengthy treatment in the *Iliad*. The entirety of book 17 is dedicated to this episode of the fight for Patroclus body. As a result, the artist reflects that by extending the episode through the length of the band in a variety of scenes. However, this band lacks the typical labels found on the others. While it is possible that they have just faded, this is unlikely due to the visibility of so many others[^12]. Without these labels, it is impossible to assert which Greeks are shown defending their fallen comrade. In a certain sense, this is not essential information, as it does not change the outcome of the episode. It is due to the Greeks' devotion, named or unnamed, to Patroclus that the Trojans do not carry off the body. The textual retelling also does not provide any specific names, but rather solely states that there is a battle over the body. 


	[12] : Petrain also notes that these labels are simply absent (Petrain 194)



## [Book 18](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.04659,0.6376,0.8573,0.1929)

### αντιλοχος απανγελλι αχιλλει εως η δε θετις ερχεται προς ηφαιστον αιτησουσα παντευχιαν ο δ αυτη προθυμως ποιει οι δ αχαιοι το σωμα του πατρόκλου επι τας ναυς διακομιζουσιν

As has been mentioned before, the textual retelling does not employ any method to mark the Iliadic book divisions. As a result, the mention of Antilochus here poses a small problem. In the *Iliad*, this hero is sent to alert Achilles of the death of Patroclus at the end of book 17, and then reaches the hero at the start of book 18. I have chosen to place this small element in within the retelling of book 18. The textual retelling for books 13 through 15, where the focus was on the fighting on the battlefield, was remarkably brief. When this retelling covers book 17, which has similar action to books 13 through 15, with the addition of the fact that the fighting is over Patroclus' body, it is logical that the text would again be brief. Given the trends of the textual retelling, there is a much tighter association with Antilochus telling Achilles of his companion's death and the production of the divine arms.

This episode may seem trivial, but it does bridge the gap between the battlefield and Achilles' tent, just as it bridges books 17 and 18. The stone is too heavily damaged at this line for any of the editors to confidently read what is included in this action[^13]. The inclusion of this element in the textual retelling shows its desire to show how events precipitate others. Similar to the fact that Achilles cannot rejoin the war until he has armor, he cannot request the armor until he knows that he will have cause to rejoin the war in order to avenge the death of his companion and recover his own arms. This episode, while brief, serves to complete the chain of events that must take place in the *Iliad*. 

Book 18 demonstrates how retellings can change the order of episodes, so long as it does not alter the essential plot points of the original work. This book is made up of two episodes, [Achilles grieving over Patroclus' body](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.07378,0.6615,0.4424,0.1606) and then the [arms of Achilles](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.4951,0.6591,0.3961,0.1610). The visual retelling follows the *Iliad* by keeping the episodes in this order, but they are reversed in the textual retelling. However, swapping the position of these two episodes does not alter the course of the poem in any way. The recovery of Patroclus' body is an essential episode because it spurs Achilles to return to the battlefield. The textual retelling focuses on the transportation of the body back to the ships, and lets the reader fill in the devastating emotions that this causes in Achilles. The visual retelling focuses on Achilles' grieving, since the previous band was entirely dedicated to the Greeks transporting the body. Unlike the reference to Antilochus discussed above, the Achaeans bringing Patroclus' body to the ships must be considered part of the retelling for book 18, since it follows the petition for the arms and precedes the arms being delivered to Achilles. The author of the prose summary simply changed the order of the elements of the retelling, without changing the plot. 

The prose summary and the visual retelling take opposite approaches to the grief of Achilles. In the visual retelling, Achilles mourns Patroclus, whose body is laid on a bed. Both heroes are identified with labels, and two clear additional mourners look on. There is a [third figure](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.4198,0.6673,0.08449,0.1330), which Jahn erroneously depicts as a Nereid attending Thetis. Petrain notes that "[this] indistinct figure probably represents another mourner[^14]." Given the close proximity of this figure to the mourning scene, rather than to Thetis, it is far more likely that Petrain's theory is an improvement on Jahn's drawing. In contrast, the textual retelling does not explicitly mention the grief of Achilles. Antilochus' message to Achilles is enough for the reader to evoke the devastation that he felt. This extreme economy of words is remarkable, since it takes only three words to convey what an entire episode on the visual retelling does. 

Thetis acquiring the arms of Achilles is given in detail in both retellings. The carved images show Thetis, who is named, standing before the Cyclopes, who are unnamed, busy at work on the οπλοποια, while a labeled Hephaestus sits to the right. The amount of thought and knowledge that went into the production of the Tabula is evident from this depiction of Hephaestus. Since he is a cripple, he is seated, instead of standing like the Cyclopes are. This supports the idea of these Tabulae as highly learned objects meant for an elite, intelligent audience. On the stele, in addition to describing Thetis going to Hephaestus to ask for the armor, it mentions that Hephaestus "ο δ αυτη προθυμως ποιει." This detail of his willingness to help does not add much to the retelling (nor is it surprising when compared to the *Iliad*), but it does show the added detail given to this episode. 

		[13] : The stone is heavily damaged at this point, line 78, with the IG reading a 
	random series of letters and Petrain and I both leaving it as completely unclear
	
	[14] : Pertrain 195


## [Book 19](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.05324,0.4944,0.8388,0.1814)

### των δ οπλων υπο της της θετιδος ενεχθεντων την βρισηίδα αγαμεμνων αχιλλει διδωσιν

The visual retelling divides this book into two episodes, one where [Thetis brings the armor](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.07407,0.5076,0.3912,0.1580) to her son, and one where [he departs for the battlefield](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.4433,0.5007,0.4401,0.1660). The textual retelling includes Thetis arriving with the armor, and then the episode of peace making between Achilles and Agamemnon. Given the brevity of these retellings, one might expect the episode in which Thetis gives Achilles the new armor to be omitted. The episode of forging the arms would be meaningless if he did not later acquire the arms. However, the fact that both of these retellings include this episode shows its centrality to this part of the narrative. Achilles' armor and the loss of it is a central part of the *Iliad*, so the creators of these retellings do not gloss over references to it, but rather choose to show its movement through the poem explicitly. 

Both of these retellings match the *Iliad* closely for this episode. In the pictorial retelling, Achilles is in the process of arming himself. Thetis and other nymphs bear the shield ([the label](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.2943,0.5093,0.07726,0.02604) for which was missed by editors such as Michaelis, Kaibel, and Sadurska[^15] due to the fact that it appears around the image, instead of at the bottom of the band like the majority of labels on this stone), and Phoenix appears to carry a helmet. Both of these figures are labeled, but only Thetis appears in this episode in the *Iliad*. As in book 16, the connection to and reason for Phoenix's presence is clear, even if he is not mention in the original poem. It is an added detail by the artist, and does not change the episode in any way. 

The next episode in the band for book 19 shows Achilles mounting his chariot in full armor. The prose summary does not go through the smaller steps of Achilles' arming process, but rather sends him straight into action. It shows a greater tendency to proceed directly to the action, rather than lay out the build-up. The prose summary does include the episode in which Achilles and Agamemnon reconcile[^16]. It says that Agamemnon gives Briseis back to Achilles, making the obvious choice to name her over the other gifts given to win his favor, since her removal sparked the initial conflict. It is curious that this scene does not appear in the visual retelling, since an assembly of the Greeks, such as the one in this episode, was already given in the band from book 1. As a result, this scene is likely not an essential episode to retelling the *Iliad*, since it is not included here to bridge the space between Achilles in his camp and returning to the battlefield. 


	[15] : see Petrain 195, footnote 17, and compare it to the label for Asius in book 13. 

	[16] : a discussion of how much of a reconciliation this act truly 
	is not within the scope of this project

## [Book 20](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.06163,0.3748,0.8223,0.1413)

While the textual retelling has been brief for certain books thus far, it entirely omits book 20. The narrative moves from Achilles recovering Briseis to him fighting in the Scamander, both of which clearly belong to books 19 and 21 respectively. It does not show the gods rejoining the fight, or Achilles' first kills upon returning to battle. This silence on the part of this retelling is unique and notable. The textual retelling for book 17, another battle book, is only two lines on the stele, but there is nothing for book 20. This retelling consistently omits the actions of the gods, whether they take place in the heavens or on the Trojan plain. With this in mind, the action of the poem does not progress or change in this book. Achilles has just donned his armor, and that is enough to trigger the audience's memory of Achilles return to the battlefield. There is no other logical action to follow his arming episode, so the textual retelling does not need to state his return explicitly. That idea is contained in the final episode of book 19. 

The pictorial retelling does not have the capacity to omit this book, as the textual retelling does. It cannot lack detail in the same way that the stele's summary can provide merely a few words to retell the book. However, it can be vague and unclear through the lack of captions. As was already mentioned, many of the figures, particularly those showing action on the battlefield, are difficult to identify without context and labels. The only labels that are visible name Poseidon as the first figure, and Achilles as the third. Context can help identify the figure between them as Aeneas, given the intervention of Poseidon between Aeneas and Achilles in the *Iliad*[^17]. Just as certain figures on the bands are meant to stand for the wider Trojan or Greek forces, so too is Poseidon a stand-in for the Olympian gods who partake in the action on the battlefield in this book. He is not the only god who intervenes, but his presence is meant to call to mind the other gods who are not depicted. It is unclear why Poseidon is named so frequently in the labels for the visual retelling. His label appears three times (books 13, 20, and 21). He is an active god who enters the battlefield often, but there seems to be a clear focus on his presence over the other gods. 

Comparison to the *Iliad* does not allow one to identify the other Trojans whom Achilles fights to any degree of certainty. Petrain posits that the second to last pair could be [Achilles and Hector](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.5174,0.3878,0.2222,0.1089)[^18]. However, this is unlikely. Since the encounter between these two heroes in book 20 does not have a decisive outcome, but rather ends in a tie, there is no need for the artist to show this scene. This is not the essential clash between Hector and Achilles of book 22, but rather an optional element that neither of these retellings chooses to include. 

The theories for the last pair of figures in this band are also speculative. It is clear from [Jahn's drawing](https://www.mediterranees.net/art_antique/oeuvres/iliaca/images/capitolina1.gif) that he thinks the figures are on the same side, since one appears to be helping the other up. It is unclear if he thinks they are both warriors, or if one is a god, given that the first is nude and the second is clothed but weaponless in his drawing. Petrain follows Valenzuela Montenegro by proposing that these figures are gods, and his read of the position is different from Jahn's[^19]. Given the Tabula's general inclination to avoid depicting gods, it seems out of place to read these last figures as deities spectating the action. Considering the role of the gods in book 20, if other gods were to be depicted, they would likely be a part of the action, as Poseidon is a few scenes earlier.  

	[17] : Iliad 20.291

	[18] :  Petrain 196

	[19] : Petrain writes that "a seated figure faces left. To the right, a standing 
	figure in profile also faces left and raises an arm. Perhaps two gods 
	surveying the battle." Petrain 196

## [Book 21](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.06742,0.2617,0.8166,0.1372)

### αχιλλευς δε εἰς τὸν σκαμανδρον καταδιώξας αστεροπαιον αποκτεινει αχιλλευς δε τον εν τωι ποταμῶι διαφυγὼν κινδυνον

The central episode of book 21 is Achilles fighting in the Scamander. The band for this book shows a labeled [Achilles striking an enemy](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.09144,0.2676,0.1707,0.1270). The inscribed stele names Asteropaeus, a Trojan ally who is a descendant of the river god Axios, as the enemy of Achilles at this point in the narrative. It is this death that causes the god Scamander to rise up and attack Achilles. This connection clearly explains the importance of naming Asteropaeus in the summary. However, there is no label to identify the figure in the visual retelling. Instead, Petrain suggests that this figure is Lycaon. His comparison to the house of the Cryptoportico in Pompeii is compelling, but there is no reason to restrict this figure to one character, as he does[^20]. There is nothing to suggest that the artist of the stone meant for its reader to take this figure as any one specific Trojan. Rather, as has been seen throughout the pictorial retelling, this figure is meant to stand for all of those whom Achilles slays while in the river. By not supplying any label to this figure, the artist allows his audience to fill in the episode with the various deaths that occur at this point in the narrative. The figure is meant to call to mind the slaughter that causes Achilles to have to do battle with the river god.  

The label of [Poseidon](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.3793,0.2741,0.1756,0.1152) does give a modern reader pause. While it is true that he does appear and gives support to Achilles, it is Hephaestus who truly subdues the enraged river. Poseidon does appear several times in the visual retelling, and perhaps he is easier to depict than the blazing fire that comes from Hephaestus. The textual retelling again omits any mention of the gods here. It merely says that αχιλλευς δε τον εν τωι ποταμῶι διαφυγὼν κίνδυνον. There is no other way to talk about the events in the Scamander without involving the gods except for the vague description given here. 

The last episode of book 21 shows [Achilles pushing the Trojans to the gates](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.4821,0.2682,0.3843,0.1220) of the citadel. This is reflected in the visual retelling by Achilles chasing two figures, who are identified as Phrygians, towards the Trojan walls. This places Achilles in position to start the next episode, the death of Hector. The images on the tabula are meant to be read as a continuous narrative, which is why the initial image for book 22 already has Achilles and Hector engaged in the chase. As often happens, the last image on one band purposefully sets up the opening action of the next band. The textual retelling does not always set up its action in this way. Here, the prose summary jumps to the clash of Achilles and Hector, without giving the intermediary action. 

	[20] : Petrain 196, footnote 19

## [Book 22](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.08420,0.1226,0.7943,0.1643)

### εκτορα μονομαχων αποκτινει και τα οπλα αναλαμβανει και τον νεκρον εκδησαμενος εκ του διφρου δια του πεδιου ελκει επι τας ναυς

As is common with the central episodes of the *Iliad*, such as the death of Patroclus and the ransom of Hector, the retellings for book 22 match the poem very closely. The visual retelling begins with [Hector and Achilles](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.09722,0.1311,0.2801,0.1495) standing among the Trojans walls. This scene is very static, in contrast to the famous chase scene around the citadel as seen in the *Iliad*. One could think that this visual retelling is trite and flat. However, it must be mentioned that by placing these two figures together before the Trojan citadel, those details must have been enough to evoke the episode of Hector's death for the intended audience. The Tabula does not need to show Achilles pursing Hector, but instead has the freedom to place them in a context that, given their relation to one another, calls to mind this scene without question. The Tabula has several scenes of warriors pursuing one another, and it easily could have repeated such a scene here. However, since it does not, the scene that is shown instead clearly had a powerful impression on an ancient audience. The continuation of the setting, with book 21 ending with the Trojan citadel and this book starting with the same structure, supports the notion that these visual retellings must be read in a continuous manner. 

Unlike the death of Patroclus, the Tabula does depict the [death of Hector](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.3287,0.1274,0.2321,0.1484). This death is the climax of the action within the *Iliad*, and cannot be inferred as subtly as the death of Patroclus can. Even the prose summary is brief, yet clear, on the centrality of this death. With only three words, εκτορα μονομαχων αποκτινει, the summary conveys the complete episode. It does not need to elaborate about the way in which Hector died, but rather focuses on the central action, and lets the reader fill in the rest. 

The band for book 22 does not explicitly stress the recovery of the armor, but it does show Hector's body as nude once [it is tied to Achilles' chariot](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.4951,0.1289,0.3547,0.1493). The element of Achilles dragging Hector's body back to the ships is essential to this episode. Not only does it set up the action of book 24, but it evokes the overall conflict in the *Iliad*. One cannot retell the death of Hector without Achilles desecrating his body in this way. Where the pictorial retelling shows the vital nature of this element by showing Achilles dragging Hector's corpse, the textual retelling states that Achilles drags the body over the Trojan plain and to the ships. These details, while they do not add any unexpected information, are added to heighten the tension and importance of this episode within the wider context of the *Iliad*. 

## [Book 23](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.6797,0.1059,0.2546,0.08362)

### και τον πατροκλον θαψας τιθησιν επ αυτ̣ωι αγωνα των αριστεων

Book 23 is highly standard across the retellings and the *Iliad*. Given the highly compressed nature of any retelling, and the lack of action caused by the outcome of these funeral games, neither the prose summary nor the images spend much time on these contests. They do not impact the tide of battle or lead to other events. Still, they are so closely tied to Patroclus' funeral, and receive such expanded attention in the *Iliad*, that they cannot be omitted. They are as essential to this point in the narrative as Patroclus' funeral itself is. Similarly, there is no need to show the variety of contests held, but instead [the chariot race](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.4806,0.01931,0.3843,0.1139) in conjunction with [the funeral pyre](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_9@0.1082,0.01194,0.3302,0.1204) is enough to evoke the wider games. 


## [Book 24](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.6291,0.03704,0.2999,0.09375)

### ο δε πριαμος επι τας ναυς παραγενομενος εκτορα λυτρουται παρ αχιλλεως επανελθοντος δε του πριαμου παλιν εις την πολιν θαπτουσιν οι τρωες και τον ταφον αυτου κατασκευαζουσι

The close of the *Iliad* is, understandably, very similar across the retellings due to its importance. The poem must come to close that is recognizable to its audience. Both the textual and visual retelling on the Tabula Capitolina expand this episode greatly, showing its importance and fixed nature within the poem. The carved images in the band for book 24 show the different phases of this episode, where [Hector and the gifts](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.6829,0.03819,0.1454,0.08218) are loaded into a wagon, and [Hermes and Priam sit before Achilles](http://www.homermultitext.org/ict2/?urn=urn:cite:hmt:capimgs.2017a:Capitoline_15@0.7726,0.03906,0.1582,0.09404) in his tent. The appearance of Hermes does reflect the god's role in the *Iliad*. However, his absence in the prose summary shows that he is not an essential element to this episode. For a compact retelling, such as the stele on the Tabula, the presence or absence of Hermes does not alter the episode in any way. It does not matter exactly how Priam manages to enter the Greek camp, but only that he does, in fact, enter the camp. Adding or removing Hermes merely adds more detail to the episode; it does not define it. 

A close-reader of the *Iliad* will recall that Hermes does not enter the tent of Achilles, but rather withdraws before Priam enters. Previous scholars have taken this "inconsistency" as evidence for the argument that the Tabulae Iliacae were lower-class objects that did not reflect a nuanced knowledge of the Homeric poems. Squire argues that "images will never be homologous with texts because they do not enshrine the same *verbal* logic[^21]." He sees this inclusion of Hermes as within the retelling's liberty to acknowledge the text while not adhering to it in a rigid manner. Another stance would be that the inclusion of Hermes shows the great economy of the genre of retellings. Instead of having a separate episode where Hermes leads Priam to the Greek camp, as he does in the *Iliad*, the pictorial retelling's use of Hermes serves to remind the reader of this episode without having to depict it at all. Simply including Hermes inside of the tent saves the artist from depicting another scene, thereby allowing him more space to expand the episodes that he has chosen to depict. 

The prose summary relates that Priam comes to ransom Hector from Achilles, and then upon returning to the city, the Trojans bury him and prepare his tomb. As is typical of this textual retelling, there is not a great deal of expansion, but the core elements are retained. The fact that the *Iliad* ends with the burial of Hector is reflected in the inclusion of this element in the retelling. This is explicitly stated on the inscribed stele in order to signal the close of the epic. However, an ancient audience would have been able to connect the fact that Priam's recovery of his son's body would lead directly to the burial of Hector. This is exactly the kind of connection that the pictorial retelling expects its reader to make, as it does not show the burial of Hector. Perhaps it is the textual nature that causes the prose summary to end in a way that so strongly echoes the end of the *Iliad* itself. The textual retelling makes sure to bring its retelling to the furthest point possible in the narrative, while the visual retelling allows the reader to fill in the context in order to close the poem. 


	[21] : Squire, 2011, 144-145


#### Back to [Home](https://brclar15.github.io/tabulaCapitolina/)
#### Back to [Analysis Overview](analysisPage.md)

