#### Back to [Home](https://brclar15.github.io/tabulaCapitolina/)

# Intro to Tabula Capitolina

## Tabulae Iliacae

The Tabulae Iliacae are a group [twenty-two stone tablets](https://github.com/brclar15/tabulaCapitolina/blob/master/tabulae.csv)[1. Note that there are one or two spurious ones, cite Squire 2011 appendix 413-416] that are given this name due to the images which they bear. Beger used this name first in 1699, and the name continues to be used today. While the initial impulse may be to associate these stones with the *Iliad*, Squire notes that "the adjective *Iliaca* at once suggests the *Iliad* while outwardly referring simply to anything 'Trojan[Squire 2011, 32].' Still, although the majority of these stones depict scenes from the Trojan Epic Cycle, six of them focus on Heracles, Alexander the Great[for the oddities of the historical ones, see Squire 2011 pg 49 for its possible connection to Julio-Claudian ideology that fits with the Aeneas bit in the Tab Cap], or other scenes. However, due to their similar size, design, and supposed function, they are still considered part of the Tabulae Iliacae (Petrain 2). The most striking aspects that suggest that these stones are part of the same category are the presence of carved low-raised relief figure accompanied by Greek inscriptions found on all of them, as well as similar reverse inscriptions, seven of which are in the so called "magic square" formation[foot note to image 11, 24, 4, 6 9]. Following the tradition of numerous scholars, I have maintained the contentious title of these objects for ease of reference. 

## Tabula Capitoline, why this one

The Tabula Capitolina (seen here in [stone](http://shot.holycross.edu/eikon/tabulaeiliacae/Capitoline_1.jpg) and here in a [line drawing](http://www.mediterranees.net/art_antique/oeuvres/iliaca/images/capitolina1.gif)) shows scenes from the *Iliad*, the *Aethiopis*, the *Iliasparva* and the *Iliupersis*. Additionally, there is a prose summary of the *Iliad* engraved on a stele. However, the artifact has been damaged at some point during its history.  The original stone would have been about 42cm by 25cm, but is now 30cm by 25cm. In its current condition, the central block shows scences from the *Iliupersis*. It is bordered on the top with scenes from *Iliad* 1, on the bottom with scenes from the *Aethiopis* and the *Iliasparva* (one band for each epic), to the right with the surviving stele inscribed with the summary of *Iiad* 7 through 24. To the right of the extant stele are scenes from *Iliad*, starting with the band for book 13 moving up the stone until book 24. It is hardly a leap to asume that the right side of the stone would have been mirrored on the left side with another stele and the remainder of the books of the *Iliad*. Therefore, in its original state, a stele with the prose summary of *Iliad* 1 through 7 would have bordered the left side of the central *Iliupersis* block, and then been bordered by pictoral bands of scenes from *Iliad* 2 through 12. This symmetry is relfected in other Tabula Iliacae, such as the [Sarti](http://shot.holycross.edu/eikon/tabulaeiliacae/jahn1873-page143.jpg) labeled as B, [Veronensis 1](http://shot.holycross.edu/eikon/tabulaeiliacae/jahn1873-page144.jpg) labeled as C, and [Albani](http://shot.holycross.edu/eikon/tabulaeiliacae/jahn1873-page146.jpg) labled as J. The stone itself offers no guide or order to reading it, which is an aspect that will be addressed later on in this project. 

I have focused exclusively on the Tabula Capitolina for a variety of reasons. First, it is one of the best preserved out of the group of these tabulae. The majority of the others are highly fragmentary and, as a result, only offer isolated retellings of one scene. This makes the Tabula Capitolina unique, as it shows intricate retellings made up of several different episodes. The extant part of the tabula contains content from four different epics, and mixes both visual and textual retellings. The content from *Iliad* 13 through 24 are present both in the textual summary as well as the carved figures. This double retelling combined provides the opportunity to look at retellings across different media on the same artifact. Secondly, having open access photography of this tabula made it the natural choice around which to base this study. I have used the photography to create my own diplomatic digital edition of this tabula, and will discuss this decision further in a later section. A study of the retellings shown on all of the Tabulae would no doubt be highly revealing and important, but goes beyond the scope of this project. 

## Date and Location

If one accepts that these stones are all part of the same group, it becomes possible to date the Tabulae Iliacae fairly accurately. It is the seemingly outlying stones with historical scenes that in fact provide part of this dating. Both 18L and 22Get both bear inscriptions that recount historical events progressing backwards from 15/16 AD. Petrain suggests that these dates must reflect the production of these stones relatively well, since the end point would get progressively more out of date if they were produced decently after 15/16 AD[Petrain 14, 20]. This does not mean definitively that all of the Tabulae were produced within the few years after this date, but it is reasonable that the majority of them were in fact of the same relative time, given similar stylistics and shallowness of the reliefs[For this same reason, 19J is noticeably later, in the second century. But should be seen as showing how popular these things were, Squire 2011 61].

Another factor that aids in dating the Tabulae is focus on Aeneas seen in the Tabula Capitoline. The Trojan hero and future founder of Rome appears four times through the pictorial retellings. The artist went to great length to highlight Aeneas, focusing on actions that strongly tie to the *Aeneid* and the myth of the foundation of Rome. In rapid succession, he is seen receiving the *penates*, fleeing the burning citadel with Anchises on his back and Ascanius, and then boarding a ship with the caption "Αἰνήας σὺν τοῖς ἰδίοις ἀπαί<ρ>ων εἰς τὴν Ἑσπερίαν." Both Squire and Petrain note that not only the focus on Aeneas and the foundation myth, but also the artistic representation of Aeneas closely matches that of the Ara Pacis and the Forum of Augustus[Squire 2011, 59, Petrain 20]. With the forum being completed in 5 BCE, and the publishing of the *Aeneid* in 19 BCE, one can confidently situate the Tabulae at the end of the reign of Augustus, or shortly after. 

## History of their scholarship 
### As well as their function

The problem that arises when dealing with the scholarship on the Tabulae Iliacae is that the publications mirror the piecemeal fashion in which the stones were found. The first reference to the Tabulae appears to be Raffaella Fabretti in his work on Trajan's column in 1683 as an appendix, where he focuses on the Tabula Capitoline and mentions three others[Squire 2011, 28]. 

In 1873, Otto Jahn's work was augmented and published by his nephew Adolf Michaelis as *Griechische Bilderchroniken*. This work detailed twelve Tabulae and began the trend of cataloguing them with letters (A through M, with no I). Here, Michaelis posits that the Tabulae served as teaching aids, but for a well-educated audience, given their highly compressed format[Pertain 11]. 

In 1964, Anna Sadurska's *Les Tables Iliaques* served as a catalogue and extensive study of nineteen such objects. She begins the practice of adding numbers to the catalogue letters that Jahn began, giving us the current labeling system for the Tabulae. Notably, she published nineteen black and white plates of the stones, along with her catalogue[Squire 2011, 30 notes that these are of superior size and quality compared to VM's in 46 plates in 2004].

Nicholas Horsfall wrote the next major publication the Tabulae in 1979. However, he is a controversial figure in the history of these artifacts. Horsfall argues that, due to a few inaccuracies when compared to literary sources, the Tabulae must have been low-class educational tools for an audience that needed to be reminded of Homer, but did not care about accuracy. Squire skips over Horsfall entirely in his review of the scholarship on the Tabulae, relegating him to the footnotes. In contrast, Petrain calls his work a "landmark article," but qualifies that "all students of the tablets are in his debt - even if we cannot agree with his overall evaluation of the objects.[Petrain 11-12]"

Nina Valenzuela Montenegro produced the next important work on the Tabulae. In her 2004 work Die Tabulae Iliacae, is the first to include twenty-two stones. Her approach thoroughly analyzes the inscriptions in conjunction with their corresponding images, which has been previously divorced from one another in scholarship. Valenzuela Montenegro's work is the most complete treatment of the dating, workshops, and literary context of these artifacts[Petrain 12].

The two most up-to-date works on the Tabulae are that of Michael Squire and David Petrain. Building upon the centuries of work done on these artifacts, both scholars work through the Tabulae's original context as well adopting Valenzuela Montenegro's approach of maintaining the connection between the text and images on the stones. Petrain addresses how an ancient audience would have read these complex objects, and draws extensive parallels between the Tabula Capitolina and famous ekphrases in classical literature. His appendices are invaluable to any study of the Tabulae for their completeness and ease in synthesizing his discussion of the text and images on the stones. Michael Squire 

as have shown that these highly complex and allusive documents are greatly worthy of interest. They were meant to be displayed and used by a highly educated class of people in order to display their knowledge. 


#### Back to [Home](https://brclar15.github.io/tabulaCapitolina/)
